CIA WORLD FACTBOOK 1992 via the Libraries of the Univ. of Missouri-St. Louis
 
 Match 117   DB Rec# - 72,830  Dataset-WOFACT
 
Source        :CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 
Source key    :CI 
Program       :WORLD FACTBOOK 
Program key   :CI WOFACT 
Update sched. :Annually         
ID number     :CI WOFACT 111              
Title         :Vital Statistics - INDIAN OCEAN 
Data type     :TEXT 
End year      :1993
Date of record:01/22/1993
Country       : 
| INDIAN OCEAN 
Text          : 
INDIAN OCEAN 
GEOGRAPHY 
Total area: 73,600,000 km2 
 
Land area: 73,600,000 km2; Arabian Sea, Bass Strait, Bay of Bengal, Java 
Sea, Persian Gulf, Red Sea, Strait of Malacca, Timor Sea, and other 
tributary water bodies 
 
Comparative area: slightly less than eight times the size of the US; 

 
third-largest ocean (after the Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean, but larger 
than the Arctic Ocean) 
 
Coastline: 66,526 km 
 
Disputes: some maritime disputes (see littoral states) 
 
Climate: northeast monsoon (December to April), southwest monsoon (June 
to October); tropical cyclones occur during May/June and October/November in 
the north Indian Ocean and January/February in the south Indian Ocean 
 
Terrain: surface dominated by counterclockwise gyre (broad, circular 
system of currents) in the south Indian Ocean; unique reversal of surface 
currents in the north Indian Ocean - low pressure over southwest Asia from 
hot, rising, summer air results in the southwest monsoon and 
southwest-to-northeast winds and currents, while high pressure over northern 
Asia from cold, falling, winter air results in the northeast monsoon and 
northeast-to-southwest winds and currents; ocean floor is dominated by the 
Mid-Indian Ocean Ridge and subdivided by the Southeast Indian Ocean Ridge, 
Southwest Indian Ocean Ridge, and Ninety East Ridge; maximum depth is 7,258 
meters in the Java Trench 
 
Natural resources: oil and gas fields, fish, shrimp, sand and gravel 
aggregates, placer deposits, polymetallic nodules 
 
Environment: endangered marine species include the dugong, seals, 
turtles, and whales; oil pollution in the Arabian Sea, Persian Gulf, and Red 
Sea 
 
Note: major chokepoints include Bab el Mandeb, Strait of Hormuz, Strait 
of Malacca, southern access to the Suez Canal, and the Lombok Strait; ships 
subject to superstructure icing in extreme south near Antarctica from May to 
October 
 
ECONOMY 
Overview: The Indian Ocean provides a major highway for the movement of 
petroleum products from the Middle East to Europe and North and South 
American countries. Fish from the ocean are of growing economic importance 
to many of the bordering countries as a source of both food and exports. 
Fishing fleets from Russia, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan also exploit the Indian 
Ocean, mainly for shrimp and tuna. Large reserves of hydrocarbons are being 
tapped in the offshore areas of Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, and Western 
Australia.  An estimated 40% of the world's offshore oil production comes 
from the Indian Ocean. Beach sands rich in heavy minerals and offshore 
placer deposits are actively exploited by bordering countries, particularly 
India, South Africa, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Thailand. 
 
Industries: based on exploitation of natural resources, particularly 
marine life, minerals, oil and gas production, fishing, sand and gravel 
aggregates, placer deposits 
 
COMMUNICATIONS 
Ports: Bombay (India), Calcutta (India), Madras (India), Colombo (Sri 
Lanka), Durban (South Africa), Fremantle (Australia), Jakarta (Indonesia), 
Melbourne (Australia), Richard's Bay (South Africa) 
 
Telecommunications: submarine cables from India to United Arab Emirates 
and Malaysia 
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
These files extracted from Dept. of Commerce's National Trade Databank (NTDB)
CD-ROM, SuDoc no. C 1.88:993/11 using software developed by RCM of the Univ.
of Missouri-St. Louis Libraries, 12/1/1993 :/ WF930116
